---
episode_id: 305
title: Episode 305 - Splitting without Splitting (Tsvetelina Plummer, Pricillia Gunawan)
layout: folge
video: y18Hv6_m1a8
description: Why would you split teams? Which approaches work in the real world?
thumbnail: folge305.png
tags:
- English
- Organisation
- Agile Meets Architecture
---

This episode was streamed live from [Agile meets Architecture
conference](https://www.agile-meets-architecture.com/).

We all know it - our team has become too big, meetings take too long,
half of the conversations don’t apply to our work, and the sprint goal
is now "finish all stories in the sprint"! The classic textbook and
the chatbot are certain: The team should be split!

And this is indeed the optimal solution. But real life isn’t a
textbook, and our resources aren't infinite. What if instead of
slicing to be a-two-pizza-team, we asked the question: "What do we
actually need to work well together?"

After over 4 years working with several large data science and
engineering teams that wrestled with multiple variations of the same
problem, we've resisted the urge to split by the book.

Instead of insisting on the one right way, we want to show you how
tuning in, listening, and deliberately choosing the solution, can
bring back the fun, ease and coveted efficiency we all are after.

That could mean: changing who does what in the team, redrawing team
boundaries, or combining pragmatic approaches of multiple
organizational design systems like LeSS, Team Topologies, and Fluid
Teams.

The trick is to stop chasing the perfect model and start designing
something that actually fits both the team’s culture and unique
problem domain. Think of it like tailoring a suit: it has to fit the
people wearing it, not just look good on a cover.
